docs: Add memory doc (#811)
camel-ai/camel: docs/key_modules/memory.md

# Memory

## Overview

The Memory module in CAMEL provides a flexible and powerful system for storing, retrieving, and managing information for AI agents. It enables agents to maintain context across conversations and retrieve relevant information from past interactions, enhancing the coherence and relevance of AI responses.

## Getting Started

### Installation

Ensure you have CAMEL AI installed in your Python environment:

```bash

> pip install camel-ai
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pip install camel-ai
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```

### Basic Usage

> Here's a quick example of how to use the LongtermAgentMemory:

Reviewer: User `` for code
```suggestion
Here's a quick example of how to use the `LongtermAgentMemory`:
```

```python

> from camel.memories import LongtermAgentMemory, ChatHistoryBlock, VectorDBBlock
> from camel.memories import MemoryRecord, ScoreBasedContextCreator
> from camel.messages import BaseMessage
> from camel.types import OpenAIBackendRole
> from camel.utils import OpenAITokenCounter
> 
> 
> # Initialize memory
> memory = LongtermAgentMemory(
>     context_creator=ScoreBasedContextCreator(OpenAITokenCounter, 1024),
>     chat_history_block=ChatHistoryBlock(),
>     vector_db_block=VectorDBBlock()
> )
> 
> # Write records to memory
> records = [
>     MemoryRecord(
>         message=BaseMessage(role_name="user", role_type="human", meta_dict=None, content="What is AI?"),
>         role_at_backend=OpenAIBackendRole.USER
>     ),
>     MemoryRecord(
>         message=BaseMessage( role_name="agent", role_type="ai", meta_dict=None, content="AI refers to systems that mimic human intelligence."),
>         role_at_backend=OpenAIBackendRole.ASSISTANT
>     )
> ]
> memory.write_records(records)
> 
> # Retrieve context
> context, token_count = memory.get_context()
> print(f"Retrieved context (token count: {token_count}):")
> for message in context:
>     print(f"{message}")

Reviewer: Would be great to autoformat the code with CAMEL's code style.
```suggestion
from camel.memories import (
    LongtermAgentMemory,
    ChatHistoryBlock,
    VectorDBBlock,
    MemoryRecord,
    ScoreBasedContextCreator,
)
from camel.messages import BaseMessage
from camel.types import OpenAIBackendRole, RoleType
from camel.utils import OpenAITokenCounter

# Initialize memory
memory = LongtermAgentMemory(
    context_creator=ScoreBasedContextCreator(OpenAITokenCounter, 1024),
    chat_history_block=ChatHistoryBlock(), vector_db_block=VectorDBBlock())

# Write records to memory
records = [
    MemoryRecord(
        message=BaseMessage(role_name="User", role_type=RoleType.USER,
                            meta_dict=None, content="What is AI?"),
        role_at_backend=OpenAIBackendRole.USER,
    ),
    MemoryRecord(
        message=BaseMessage(
            role_name="Assistant", role_type=RoleType.ASSISTANT,
            meta_dict=None,
            content="AI refers to systems that mimic human intelligence."),
        role_at_backend=OpenAIBackendRole.ASSISTANT,
    ),
]
memory.write_records(records)

# Retrieve context
context, token_count = memory.get_context()
print(f"Retrieved context (token count: {token_count}):")
for message in context:
    print(f"{message}")
```

```

## Core Components

### MemoryRecord

> The basic unit of storage in the CAMEL memory system.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The basic data unit in the CAMEL memory system.
```

> The basic unit of storage in the CAMEL memory system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The basic unit of storage in the `CAMEL` memory system.
```

Attributes:

> - `message`: The main content of the record (BaseMessage)
> - `role_at_backend`: The role this message played at the OpenAI backend (OpenAIBackendRole)
> - `uuid`: A unique identifier for the record
> - `extra_info`: Additional key-value pairs for extra information

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `message`: The main content of the record (`BaseMessage`)
- `role_at_backend`: The role this message played at the OpenAI backend (`OpenAIBackendRole`)
- `uuid`: A unique identifier for the record
- `extra_info`: Additional key-value pairs for extra information
```

Methods:

> - `from_dict()`: Reconstruct a MemoryRecord from a dictionary

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `from_dict()`: Static method to construct a MemoryRecord from a dictionary
```

> - `from_dict()`: Reconstruct a MemoryRecord from a dictionary

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `from_dict()`: Reconstruct a `MemoryRecord` from a dictionary
```

> - `to_dict()`: Convert the MemoryRecord to a dictionary for serialization

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `to_dict()`: Convert the `MemoryRecord` to a dictionary for serialization
```

> - `to_openai_message()`: Convert the record to an OpenAIMessage object

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `to_openai_message()`: Convert the record to an `OpenAIMessage` object
```

### ContextRecord

> Represents the result of memory retrieval.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The result of memory retrieval from `AgentMemory`, which is used by `ContextCreator` to select records for creating the context for the agent.
```

Attributes:

> - `memory_record`: A MemoryRecord

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `memory_record`: A `MemoryRecord`
```

- `score`: A float value representing the relevance or importance of the record

### MemoryBlock (Abstract Base Class)

> Serves as the fundamental component within the agent memory system.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Serves as the fundamental component within the agent memory system. `MemoryBlock` class follows the "Composite Design pattern" so that you can compose objects into tree structures and then work with these structures as if they were individual objects.
```

> Abstract Methods:
> 
> - `write_records()`: Write multiple records to memory
> - `clear()`: Remove all records from memory
> 
> Concrete Methods:
> 
> - `write_record()`: Write a single record to memory

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `write_records()`: Write multiple records to memory
- `write_record()`: Write a single record to memory
- `clear()`: Remove all records from memory
```
May not be necessary to give too many implementation details.

### BaseContextCreator (Abstract Base Class)

> Defines the interface for context creation strategies.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Defines the context creation strategies when retrieval messages exceed the model's context length.
```

> Abstract Properties:
> 
> - `token_counter`: For counting tokens in a message
> - `token_limit`: The maximum number of tokens allowed in the generated context
> 
> Abstract Methods:
> 
> - `create_context()`: Create conversational context from chat history

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `token_counter`: For counting tokens in a message
- `token_limit`: The maximum number of tokens allowed in the generated context
- `create_context()`: Create conversational context from chat history
```

### AgentMemory (Abstract Base Class)

A specialized form of MemoryBlock designed for direct integration with an agent.

Abstract Methods:

> - `retrieve()`: Get a list of ContextRecords from memory

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `retrieve()`: Get a list of `ContextRecords` from memory
```

> Abstract Methods:
> 
> - `retrieve()`: Get a list of ContextRecords from memory
> - `get_context_creator()`: Get a context creator
> 
> Concrete Methods:
> 
> - `get_context()`: Get chat context with a proper size for the agent

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `retrieve()`: Get a list of ContextRecords from memory
- `get_context_creator()`: Get a context creator
- `get_context()`: Get chat context with a proper size for the agent
```

## Memory Block Implementations

### ChatHistoryBlock

> Maintains a record of chat histories.

Reviewer 2: Stores all the chat histories and retrieves with optional window size.

Initialization:

> - `storage`: Optional BaseKeyValueStorage (default: InMemoryKeyValueStorage)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `storage`: Optional BaseKeyValueStorage (default: `InMemoryKeyValueStorage`)
```

> - `keep_rate`: Float value for scoring historical messages (default: 0.9)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `keep_rate`: Float value for scoring historical messages (default: `0.9`)
```

Methods:

- `retrieve()`: Get recent chat history with optional window size
- `write_records()`: Write new records to chat history
- `clear()`: Remove all chat messages

Use Case: Ideal for maintaining recent conversation context and flow.

### VectorDBBlock

Uses vector embeddings for maintaining and retrieving information.

Initialization:

> - `storage`: Optional BaseVectorStorage (default: QdrantStorage)
> - `embedding`: Optional BaseEmbedding (default: OpenAIEmbedding)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `storage`: Optional BaseVectorStorage (default: `QdrantStorage`)
- `embedding`: Optional BaseEmbedding (default: `OpenAIEmbedding`)
```

Methods:

- `retrieve()`: Get similar records based on a keyword
- `write_records()`: Convert and write new records to the vector database
- `clear()`: Remove all records from the vector database

Use Case: Better for retrieving semantically relevant information across a large set of messages.

Key Differences:

> 1. Storage Mechanism: ChatHistoryBlock uses key-value storage, VectorDBBlock uses vector database storage.
> 2. Retrieval Method: ChatHistoryBlock retrieves based on recency, VectorDBBlock retrieves based on semantic similarity.
> 3. Data Representation: ChatHistoryBlock stores messages in original form, VectorDBBlock converts to vector embeddings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Storage Mechanism: `ChatHistoryBlock` uses key-value storage, `VectorDBBlock` uses vector database storage.
2. Retrieval Method: `ChatHistoryBlock` retrieves based on recency, `VectorDBBlock` retrieves based on semantic similarity.
3. Data Representation: `ChatHistoryBlock` stores messages in original form, `VectorDBBlock` converts to vector embeddings.
```

## Agent Memory Implementations

### ChatHistoryMemory

An AgentMemory implementation that wraps ChatHistoryBlock.

Initialization:

> - `context_creator`: BaseContextCreator
> - `storage`: Optional BaseKeyValueStorage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `context_creator`: `BaseContextCreator`
- `storage`: Optional `BaseKeyValueStorage`
```

- `window_size`: Optional int for retrieval window

Methods:

- `retrieve()`: Get recent chat messages
- `write_records()`: Write new records to chat history
- `get_context_creator()`: Get the context creator
- `clear()`: Remove all chat messages

### VectorDBMemory

> An AgentMemory implementation that wraps VectorDBBlock.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An `AgentMemory` implementation that wraps `VectorDBBlock`.
```

Initialization:

> - `context_creator`: BaseContextCreator
> - `storage`: Optional BaseVectorStorage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `context_creator`: `BaseContextCreator`
- `storage`: Optional `BaseVectorStorage`
```

> - `retrieve_limit`: int for maximum number of retrieved messages (default: 3)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `retrieve_limit`: int for maximum number of retrieved messages (default: `3`)
```

Methods:

- `retrieve()`: Get relevant messages from the vector database
- `write_records()`: Write new records and update current topic
- `get_context_creator()`: Get the context creator

### LongtermAgentMemory

Combines ChatHistoryMemory and VectorDBMemory for comprehensive memory management.

Initialization:

> - `context_creator`: BaseContextCreator
> - `chat_history_block`: Optional ChatHistoryBlock
> - `vector_db_block`: Optional VectorDBBlock
> - `retrieve_limit`: int for maximum number of retrieved messages (default: 3)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `context_creator`: `BaseContextCreator`
- `chat_history_block`: Optional `ChatHistoryBlock`
- `vector_db_block`: Optional `VectorDBBlock`
- `retrieve_limit`: int for maximum number of retrieved messages (default: `3`)
```

Methods:

- `retrieve()`: Get context from both chat history and vector database
- `write_records()`: Write new records to both chat history and vector database
- `get_context_creator()`: Get the context creator
- `clear()`: Remove all records from both memory blocks

## Usage

To use the Memory module in your agent:

> 1. Choose an appropriate AgentMemory implementation (ChatHistoryMemory, VectorDBMemory, or LongtermAgentMemory).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Choose an appropriate AgentMemory implementation (`ChatHistoryMemory`, `VectorDBMemory`, or `LongtermAgentMemory`).
```

2. Initialize the memory with a context creator and any necessary parameters.
3. Use `write_records()` to add new information to the memory.
4. Use `retrieve()` to get relevant context for the agent's next action.
5. Use `get_context()` to obtain the formatted context for the agent.

> Example using LongtermAgentMemory:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Example using `LongtermAgentMemory`:
```

```python
from camel.memories import LongtermAgentMemory, ChatHistoryBlock, VectorDBBlock, ScoreBasedContextCreator
from camel.memories import MemoryRecord
from camel.messages import BaseMessage
from camel.types import OpenAIBackendRole
from camel.utils import OpenAITokenCounter

# Initialize the memory
memory = LongtermAgentMemory(
    context_creator=ScoreBasedContextCreator(OpenAITokenCounter, 1024),
    chat_history_block=ChatHistoryBlock(),
    vector_db_block=VectorDBBlock()
)

# Create and write new records
records = [
    MemoryRecord(
        message=BaseMessage(role_name="user", role_type="human", meta_dict=None, content="What is machine learning?"),
        role_at_backend=OpenAIBackendRole.USER
    ),
    MemoryRecord(
        message=BaseMessage(role_name="agent", role_type="ai", meta_dict=None, content="Machine learning is a subset of AI..."),
        role_at_backend=OpenAIBackendRole.ASSISTANT
    )
]
memory.write_records(records)

# Get context for the agent
context, token_count = memory.get_context()

> # Use the context in your agent's next action

Reviewer: This code block looks the same as the previous one to me. It may be more interesting to showcase how to use `LongtermAgentMemory` with `ChatAgent`.

```

## Advanced Topics

### Customizing Context Creator

You can create custom context creators by subclassing `BaseContextCreator`:

```python
from camel.memories import BaseContextCreator

class MyCustomContextCreator(BaseContextCreator):
    @property
    def token_counter(self):
        # Implement your token counting logic
        return 

    @property
    def token_limit(self):
        return 1000  # Or any other limit

    def create_context(self, records):
        # Implement your context creation logic
        pass

```

> ### Fine-tuning Vector Database
> 
> For VectorDBBlock and VectorDBMemory, you can fine-tune the vector database by adjusting the embedding model or storage parameters:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Customizing Vector Database Block

For `VectorDBBlock`, you can customize it by adjusting the embedding models or vector storages:
```

```python
from camel.embeddings import mistral_embedding, openai_embedding
from camel.storages.vectordb_storages import qdrant, milvus
from camel.memories import VectorDBBlock

vector_db1 = VectorDBBlock(
    embedding = mistral_embedding,
    storage = qdrant
)

vector_db2 = VectorDBBlock(
    embedding=openai_embedding,
    storage=milvus
)

> ```

Reviewer: I think this code block does not run. 
The import should be `OpenAIEmbedding`, `MistralEmbedding`, etc.

### Performance Considerations

- For large-scale applications, consider using persistent storage backends instead of in-memory storage.
- Optimize your context creator to balance between context relevance and token limits.

> - When using VectorDBMemory, be mindful of the trade-off between retrieval accuracy and speed as the database grows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- When using `VectorDBMemory`, be mindful of the trade-off between retrieval accuracy and speed as the database grows.
```

# Memory

## Overview

> The Memory module in CAMEL AI provides a flexible and powerful system for storing, retrieving, and managing information for AI agents. It enables agents to maintain context across conversations and retrieve relevant information from past interactions, enhancing the coherence and relevance of AI responses.

Reviewer 3: Use CAMEL instead of CAMEL AI
```suggestion
The Memory module in CAMEL provides a flexible and powerful system for storing, retrieving, and managing information for AI agents. It enables agents to maintain context across conversations and retrieve relevant information from past interactions, enhancing the coherence and relevance of AI responses.
```

## Getting Started

### Installation

Ensure you have CAMEL AI installed in your Python environment:

```bash
pip install camel-ai

```

### Basic Usage

Here's a quick example of how to use the LongtermAgentMemory:

```python

> from camel.memory import LongtermAgentMemory, ChatHistoryBlock, VectorDBBlock
> from camel.memory import MemoryRecord, BaseContextCreator
> from camel.messages import BaseMessage

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
from camel.memories import LongtermAgentMemory, ChatHistoryBlock, VectorDBBlock
from camel.memories import MemoryRecord, BaseContextCreator
from camel.messages import BaseMessage
```

from camel.types import OpenAIBackendRole

# Create a dummy context creator
class DummyContextCreator(BaseContextCreator):
    @property
    def token_counter(self):
        return lambda x: len(x.split())

    @property
    def token_limit(self):
        return 100

    def create_context(self, records):
        context = [record.memory_record.to_openai_message() for record in records]
        return context, sum(self.token_counter(msg.content) for msg in context)

# Initialize memory
memory = LongtermAgentMemory(
    context_creator=DummyContextCreator(),
    chat_history_block=ChatHistoryBlock(),
    vector_db_block=VectorDBBlock()
)

# Write records to memory
records = [
    MemoryRecord(

>         message=BaseMessage(role="human", content="What is AI?"),

Reviewer 3: please test the code and make sure the code can run
